README.md, before:

# Pelikan

Pelikan is Twitter's framework for developing cache services. It is:

* **Fast**: Pelikan provides high-throughput and low-latency caching solutions.

* **Reliable**: Pelikan is designed for large-scale deployment and the
  implementation is informed by our operational experiences.

* **Modular**: Pelikan is a framework for rapidly developing new caching
  solutions by focusing on the inherent architectural similarity between caching
  services and providing reusable low-level components.

[![License: Apache-2.0][license-badge]][license-url]
[![Build Status: C][c-build-badge]][c-build-url]
[![Build Status: Rust][cargo-build-badge]][cargo-build-url]
[![Fuzz Status: Rust][cargo-fuzz-badge]][cargo-fuzz-url]
[![Zulip Chat][zulip-badge]][zulip-url]

[Website](http://pelikan.io) |
[Chat][zulip-url]

# Content
* [Overview](#overview)
  * [Products](#products)
  * [Features](#features)
* [Build](#building-pelikan)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Community](#community)
  * [Stay in touch](#stay-in-touch)
  * [Contributing](#contributing)
* [Documentation](#documentation)
* [License](#license)

# Overview
After years of using and working on various cache services, we built a common
framework that reveals the inherent architectural similarity among them.

By creating well-defined modules, most of the low-level functionalities are
reused as we create different binaries. The implementation learns from our
operational experiences to improve performance and reliability, and leads to
software designed for large-scale deployment.

The framework approach allows us to develop new features and protocols quickly.

## Products
Currently Pelikan yields three main products, all of which are backends/servers.
- `pelikan_twemcache`: a Twemcache replacement
- `pelikan_slimcache`: a Memcached-like server with ultra-low memory overhead-
  compared to Memcached/Redis, the per-key overhead is reduced by up to 90%
- `pelikan_pingserver`: an over-engineered, production-ready ping server useful
  as a tutorial and for measuring baseline RPC performance
- **[Experimental]**`pelikan_segcache`: a Memcached-like server with extremely high
  memory efficiency and excellent core scalability. See our [NSDI'21 paper]
  for design and evaluation details.
- **[Experimental]**`pelikan_segcache_rs`: a Rust implementation of
  `pelikan_segcache` which includes TLS support and is the preferred Segcache
  implementation.
- **[Experimental]**`pelikan_pingserver_rs`: a Rust implementation of
  `pelikan_pingserver` which includes TLS support.

## Features
- runtime separation of control and data plane
- predictably low latencies via lockless data structures, worker never blocks
- per-module config options and metrics that can be composed easily
- multiple storage and protocol implementations, easy to further extend
- low-overhead command logger for hotkey and other important data analysis

# Building Pelikan

## Requirement
- platform: Mac OS X or Linux
- build tools: `cmake (>=2.8)`
- compiler: `gcc (>=4.8)` or `clang (>=3.1)`
- (optional) unit testing framework: `check (>=0.10.0)`. See below.

## Build
```sh
git clone https://github.com/twitter/pelikan.git
mkdir _build && cd _build
cmake ..
make -j
```
The executables can be found under ``_bin/`` (under build directory)

To run all the tests, including those on `ccommon`, run:
```sh
make test
```

To skip building tests, replace the `cmake` step with the following:
```sh
cmake -DCHECK_WORKING=off ..
```
## Install `check`
To compile and run tests, you will have to install `[check]`. Please follow
instructions in the project.

**Note**: we highly recommend installing the latest version of `check` from
source, as there are, unfortunately, a [linker bug][check-linker-bug] in
packages installed by the current versions of `brew` (OS X), `CentOS` and
`Ubuntu LTS`. The bug does not affect building executables.



# Building Pelikan (Rust)

## Requirement
- Rust [stable toolchain](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/get-started)
- C toolchain: `llvm/clang (>= 7.0)`
- Build tools: `cmake (>= 3.2)`

## Build
```sh
git clone https://github.com/twitter/pelikan.git
cd pelikan
cargo build --release
```

## Tests
```sh
cargo test
```


# Usage
Using `pelikan_twemcache` as an example, other executables are highly similar.

To get info of the service, including usage format and options, run:
```sh
_bin/pelikan_twemcache -h
```

To launch the service with default settings, simply run:
```sh
_bin/pelikan_twemcache
```

To launch the service with the sample config file, run:
```sh
_bin/pelikan_twemcache config/twemcache.conf
```

**NOTE**: The Rust servers use TOML configuration files, sample configs can be
found in the `config` folder of this repository.

You should be able to try out the server using an existing memcached client,
or simply with `telnet`.
```sh
$ telnet localhost 12321
Trying 127.0.0.1...
Connected to localhost.
Escape character is '^]'.
set foo 0 0 3
bar
STORED
```

**Attention**: use `admin` port for all non-data commands.
```sh
$ telnet localhost 9999
Trying 127.0.0.1...
Connected to localhost.
Escape character is '^]'.
version
VERSION 0.1.0
stats
STAT pid 54937
STAT time 1459634909
STAT uptime 22
STAT version 100
STAT ru_stime 0.019172
...
```

## Configuration

Pelikan is file-first when it comes to configurations, and currently is
config-file only. You can create a new config file following the examples
included under the `config` directory.

**Tip**: to get a list of config options for each executable, use `-c` option:
```sh
_bin/pelikan_twemcache -c
```


# Community

## Stay in touch
- Join our project chat on [![Zulip][zulip-badge]][zulip-url]
  for questions and discussions
- Follow us on Twitter: [@pelikan_cache]
- Visit <http://pelikan.io>

## Contributing

Please take a look at our [community manifesto](https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/blob/master/docs/manifesto.rst)
and [coding style guide](https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/blob/master/docs/coding_style.rst).

If you want to submit a patch, please follow these steps:

1. create a new issue
2. fork on github & clone your fork
3. create a feature branch on your fork
4. push your feature branch
5. create a pull request linked to the issue


# Documentation
We have made progress and are actively working on documentation, and will put it
on our website. Meanwhile, check out the current material under `docs/`

## License
This software is licensed under the Apache 2.0 license, see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

[@pelikan_cache]: https://twitter.com/pelikan_cache
[c-build-badge]: https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/twitter/pelikan/cmake-build/master?label=cmake%20build
[c-build-url]: https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/actions/workflows/cmake.yml?query=branch%3Amaster+event%3Apush
[cargo-build-badge]: https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/twitter/pelikan/cargo-build/master?label=cargo%20build
[cargo-build-url]: https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/actions/workflows/cargo.yml?query=branch%3Amaster+event%3Apush
[cargo-fuzz-badge]: https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/twitter/pelikan/cargo-fuzz/master?label=cargo%20fuzz
[cargo-fuzz-url]: https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/actions/workflows/fuzz.yml?query=branch%3Amaster+event%3Apush
[check]: (http://libcheck.github.io/check/)
[check-linker-bug]: (https://sourceforge.net/p/check/mailman/message/32835594/)
[license-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%202.0-blue.svg
[license-url]: https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/blob/master/LICENSE
[NSDI'21 paper]: https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi21/presentation/yang-juncheng
[zulip-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/zulip-join_chat-blue.svg
[zulip-url]: https://pelikan.zulipchat.com/

Commit message:

initial memcache to momento proxy
Initial commit of a memcache to momento proxy which parses memcache
get/set requests and fulfills them using the Momento cache client.

Proof-of-concept implementation for early testing.

README.md, after:

# Pelikan

Pelikan is Twitter's framework for developing cache services. It is:

* **Fast**: Pelikan provides high-throughput and low-latency caching solutions.

* **Reliable**: Pelikan is designed for large-scale deployment and the
  implementation is informed by our operational experiences.

* **Modular**: Pelikan is a framework for rapidly developing new caching
  solutions by focusing on the inherent architectural similarity between caching
  services and providing reusable low-level components.

[![License: Apache-2.0][license-badge]][license-url]
[![Build Status: C][c-build-badge]][c-build-url]
[![Build Status: Rust][cargo-build-badge]][cargo-build-url]
[![Fuzz Status: Rust][cargo-fuzz-badge]][cargo-fuzz-url]
[![Zulip Chat][zulip-badge]][zulip-url]

[Website](http://pelikan.io) |
[Chat][zulip-url]

# Content
* [Overview](#overview)
  * [Products](#products)
  * [Features](#features)
* [Build](#building-pelikan)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Community](#community)
  * [Stay in touch](#stay-in-touch)
  * [Contributing](#contributing)
* [Documentation](#documentation)
* [License](#license)

# Overview
After years of using and working on various cache services, we built a common
framework that reveals the inherent architectural similarity among them.

By creating well-defined modules, most of the low-level functionalities are
reused as we create different binaries. The implementation learns from our
operational experiences to improve performance and reliability, and leads to
software designed for large-scale deployment.

The framework approach allows us to develop new features and protocols quickly.

## Products
Currently Pelikan yields the following products:
- `pelikan_twemcache`: a Twemcache replacement
- `pelikan_slimcache`: a Memcached-like server with ultra-low memory overhead-
  compared to Memcached/Redis, the per-key overhead is reduced by up to 90%
- `pelikan_pingserver`: an over-engineered, production-ready ping server useful
  as a tutorial and for measuring baseline RPC performance
- **[Experimental]**`pelikan_segcache`: a Memcached-like server with extremely high
  memory efficiency and excellent core scalability. See our [NSDI'21 paper]
  for design and evaluation details.
- **[Experimental]**`pelikan_segcache_rs`: a Rust implementation of
  `pelikan_segcache` which includes TLS support and is the preferred Segcache
  implementation.
- **[Experimental]**`pelikan_pingserver_rs`: a Rust implementation of
  `pelikan_pingserver` which includes TLS support.
- [`momento_proxy`](docs/products/momento_proxy.md): a proxy which allows
  existing applications to use Momento instead of a Memcache-compatible cache
  backend.

## Features
- runtime separation of control and data plane
- predictably low latencies via lockless data structures, worker never blocks
- per-module config options and metrics that can be composed easily
- multiple storage and protocol implementations, easy to further extend
- low-overhead command logger for hotkey and other important data analysis

# Building Pelikan

## Requirement
- platform: Mac OS X or Linux
- build tools: `cmake (>=2.8)`
- compiler: `gcc (>=4.8)` or `clang (>=3.1)`
- (optional) unit testing framework: `check (>=0.10.0)`. See below.

## Build
```sh
git clone https://github.com/twitter/pelikan.git
mkdir _build && cd _build
cmake ..
make -j
```
The executables can be found under ``_bin/`` (under build directory)

To run all the tests, including those on `ccommon`, run:
```sh
make test
```

To skip building tests, replace the `cmake` step with the following:
```sh
cmake -DCHECK_WORKING=off ..
```
## Install `check`
To compile and run tests, you will have to install `[check]`. Please follow
instructions in the project.

**Note**: we highly recommend installing the latest version of `check` from
source, as there are, unfortunately, a [linker bug][check-linker-bug] in
packages installed by the current versions of `brew` (OS X), `CentOS` and
`Ubuntu LTS`. The bug does not affect building executables.



# Building Pelikan (Rust)

## Requirement
- Rust [stable toolchain](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/get-started)
- C toolchain: `llvm/clang (>= 7.0)`
- Build tools: `cmake (>= 3.2)`

## Build
```sh
git clone https://github.com/twitter/pelikan.git
cd pelikan
cargo build --release
```

## Tests
```sh
cargo test
```


# Usage
Using `pelikan_twemcache` as an example, other executables are highly similar.

To get info of the service, including usage format and options, run:
```sh
_bin/pelikan_twemcache -h
```

To launch the service with default settings, simply run:
```sh
_bin/pelikan_twemcache
```

To launch the service with the sample config file, run:
```sh
_bin/pelikan_twemcache config/twemcache.conf
```

**NOTE**: The Rust servers use TOML configuration files, sample configs can be
found in the `config` folder of this repository.

You should be able to try out the server using an existing memcached client,
or simply with `telnet`.
```sh
$ telnet localhost 12321
Trying 127.0.0.1...
Connected to localhost.
Escape character is '^]'.
set foo 0 0 3
bar
STORED
```

**Attention**: use `admin` port for all non-data commands.
```sh
$ telnet localhost 9999
Trying 127.0.0.1...
Connected to localhost.
Escape character is '^]'.
version
VERSION 0.1.0
stats
STAT pid 54937
STAT time 1459634909
STAT uptime 22
STAT version 100
STAT ru_stime 0.019172
...
```

## Configuration

Pelikan is file-first when it comes to configurations, and currently is
config-file only. You can create a new config file following the examples
included under the `config` directory.

**Tip**: to get a list of config options for each executable, use `-c` option:
```sh
_bin/pelikan_twemcache -c
```


# Community

## Stay in touch
- Join our project chat on [![Zulip][zulip-badge]][zulip-url]
  for questions and discussions
- Follow us on Twitter: [@pelikan_cache]
- Visit <http://pelikan.io>

## Contributing

Please take a look at our [community manifesto](https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/blob/master/docs/manifesto.rst)
and [coding style guide](https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/blob/master/docs/coding_style.rst).

If you want to submit a patch, please follow these steps:

1. create a new issue
2. fork on github & clone your fork
3. create a feature branch on your fork
4. push your feature branch
5. create a pull request linked to the issue


# Documentation
We have made progress and are actively working on documentation, and will put it
on our website. Meanwhile, check out the current material under `docs/`

## License
This software is licensed under the Apache 2.0 license, see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

[@pelikan_cache]: https://twitter.com/pelikan_cache
[c-build-badge]: https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/twitter/pelikan/cmake-build/master?label=cmake%20build
[c-build-url]: https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/actions/workflows/cmake.yml?query=branch%3Amaster+event%3Apush
[cargo-build-badge]: https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/twitter/pelikan/cargo-build/master?label=cargo%20build
[cargo-build-url]: https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/actions/workflows/cargo.yml?query=branch%3Amaster+event%3Apush
[cargo-fuzz-badge]: https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/twitter/pelikan/cargo-fuzz/master?label=cargo%20fuzz
[cargo-fuzz-url]: https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/actions/workflows/fuzz.yml?query=branch%3Amaster+event%3Apush
[check]: (http://libcheck.github.io/check/)
[check-linker-bug]: (https://sourceforge.net/p/check/mailman/message/32835594/)
[license-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%202.0-blue.svg
[license-url]: https://github.com/twitter/pelikan/blob/master/LICENSE
[NSDI'21 paper]: https://www.usenix.org/conference/nsdi21/presentation/yang-juncheng
[zulip-badge]: https://img.shields.io/badge/zulip-join_chat-blue.svg
[zulip-url]: https://pelikan.zulipchat.com/
